So, here we undoubtedly have
different perspectives to address these
tremendous challenges, which require
not only creativity and
innovation, and taking risks that
sometimes involve innovating by recognizing the
old knowledge of nature,
but also the art of being able to
combine
that natural wisdom well with the
innovative wisdom that technology brings us
, right?  And from there, a
question for everyone to get
this conversation started.  What
importance do you see in the
collaboration of the parties in the
various issues we have to
mediate, and the participation of
communities in the territory in the
development of solutions and technologies?
and how these develop and how from
this processes and
challenges develop that have to do with advancing
in these in this in this
need to be able to recognize that
knowledge both natural and technological,
combine it and be able to recognize from there
the challenges of the territories that
are also particular in each one.
Eduardo has already given us a little bit of insight into that.
Come on, you start.
Okay, let's go
.
Well, Felip, good afternoon to everyone.
Hey, look at what you're saying about communities or social issues, it's fundamental because at Cultiva and many other people here, we believe that there is no environmental solution without a social solution.  Well, that's not possible
because the solution isn't to preserve
60% of the planet and destroy the other
40%. The solution isn't for there to be a
human elite and others living in
terrible conditions.  We need to
solve both problems.  Uh,
we need the places we
conserve to generate decent jobs,
good living conditions, and a good
quality of life.  We need the
city to be as biodiverse,
beautiful, and healthy a place as we can create.
In other words, if as human beings we can invest so much in cement, in buildings, in, I don't know, transportation, we need much less to transform a city into a garden.  Well, that's
part of the answer, and the other part,
in our community experience, we see
a deep desire among people to
connect with natural solutions,
to plant native plants, to take care of
gardens.  And there's a way, a way, of
advanced technology process, which is for
all of us to commit and give
people the opportunity to transform
their environment.
as an idea.
Yes. Well, we at the
Cosmos Foundation have communities embedded in the DNA of
our mission.
Our purpose is to
strengthen the link between communities
and their territories in order to
promote territorial well-being,
the well-being of socio-ecosystems.
In other words, how to move towards that culture where communities are not separate from their territory, but are part of the territories, are one and the same territory.  Already?  And in that sense, one
of the tools we use
at the foundation is
architectural design, landscape architecture.
And in that design, it is about understanding
communities not as users,
beneficiaries, or clients of this
designed infrastructure, but as
co-authors of those
designs.  They are involved from the beginning
of these processes, in a process of
diagnosis, recognition of
values, recognition of
pre-existing conditions, and uses.  And from
there we promoted these
designs
collaboratively with
participatory methodologies, and then we advanced
the execution processes by
inviting those communities.  And
finally, all that participation
from diagnosis, design, and
execution ends up being the actions
that somehow ensure
greater conservation of those
conserved or generated territories.
This community, involved from the
beginning, ends up being the
main protectors of
these places because they feel that they are not only
the ancestral inhabitants, as
Eduardo rightly said, but that they
were also part of that
co-creation process.   What
you say is so important; ultimately,
how do we take care of what we don't know?  And
finally, just as you don't feel like an
outsider, if you don't feel like you're part of it,
how do you become part of the care, how
important it is to feel like you're part of it, isn't it?  And in
that sense, Felipe again, I'm going to
switch from Felipe to Felipe, what do you think?
Look,
beyond talking about
communities, I agree with those we
're discussing, and it's true,
the topic of communities was just brought up in a panel, but
I'd like to move a
little more to more mundane topics.
Speaking of money, I mean, I do believe that
monetization is key when
we talk about conservation, that
technology is transversal today, the
ancestral and the technological
coexist today.
You go to the Amazon in communities, I don't know, I was with the Machillenca in Peru a month ago and they have Starlink, so everyone is interacting, promoting and telling stories.  So, I think it's
important to incorporate
economics not from a romantic perspective, not from the perspective that we
only have to
, for example, talking about making
cities greener, right?  We spend
money on concrete, but why don't we
spend money on making the city
greener?  because we don't have an
economic indicator for it.  Concrete does have an
economic indicator.  Then we do know
the UEFA square meter with which it is
built.
But the green thing, in that example, we don't have an economic indicator for it, and it seems that the world of biodiversity, the world of ecology, of nature, is foreign to us, and we have lived for a long time through philanthropy, feeding these spaces, but clearly it has not been enough.  It's appreciated, but it's not
enough.
So, in my opinion, this cultural change comes from using the tools of a system that, whether we like it or not, doesn't have a logic.  uh those tools.  If
we finally manage to excite a
BlackRock, a Blackstone, an
Alliance, the largest investment funds
in the world, and show them
that this is as profitable as, or even more profitable than,
extracting or destroying, we will be able to achieve
all these objectives, which are
things that are quite obvious,
in
cooperation, obviously with the
communities and all that.
Yes. Well, we have our work cut out for us in terms of being able to
put metrics to the
care economy, don't we?  Or the value of non-use.
Okay, Eduardo,
I want to approach that question from
the perspective of understanding languages, because
when you are in a territory there is a
language.  When I'm in the city and
in these settings, there's a different
language and different logic.
And I think that part of the great challenge we have for these collaborative processes in the territories, with the territories, for the territory, from the territory, is to understand that we have to find a common language and that we also have to find what those translation tools will be, what an unmet basic need means in a territory.
What does it mean to ask what kind
of education the territory needs,
right?  It's not what the Ministry of
Education is thinking about from the city,
because the people in Nuqu, in this
territory I was telling you about,
where Josefina is, are being
taught math, physics,
biology, and
even about species that don't even
exist in that territory.  So, the mere
fact that we don't understand that we
have to build a bridge between what
is necessary for them, what
they need, versus
our capital systems,
our financial systems, our
educational systemsif we don't make
an analogy and
translate between what we have
created and what it means to be a
frontline guardian and what it means to
protect those places, speaking
particularly of the most
biodiverse places in the world, which
are often the most forgotten by
governments themselveswell, if we don't make that
translation, we can invent all
the strategies and methodologies that
already exist today to talk about
collaboration, to talk about
cooperation, but I have to be on the
ground, sit down with the people,
find the organization through
which I will connect with them
and create, in that
process, begin that networking and weaving together
our knowledge as cities, as a
capital system, a Western system,
however we want to put it, with what they
have learned and with what it means for them to
live life.  So we have a
huge challenge in that translation process
and in that process of ensuring that the translation
enables a cooperation process and
that it works for both of us.
That's interesting what you say, because
let's also remember that more than
80% of our biodiversity is
found in the Global South, isn't that
right?  in the southern hemisphere and
normally our
work methodologies and
information gathering do not always have an
endogenous origin.  So, how important is
relevance in this translation, in
this decoding?  Thank you very much,
Eduardo.  Hey, and Nicols from Pantera.
Well, thank you very much first of all for the
invitation and I think it's already quite
clear and I also echo what was
mentioned in the keynote speech, what
has also been mentioned here about the
importance of working in the
territory, of working to create
solutions from the territory and for the
territory.  So in that sense I'm not going to delve much deeper into that because I think that for all of us the basic issue, the fundamental pillar for an intervention that is truly efficient and effective in the territory is to get involved with the local communities who are making use of that place.
And I would like to delve a little deeper into
the second part of your question, which is
about collaboration.
Collaboration also has other facets,
and in the NGO where I work,
we
focus on conservation, specifically on felines,
as a flagship species, as a
pillar for our
conservation efforts.  We work in the
territory with local people and
conservation biology; in fact,
conservation started under a
name which is
conservation biology, that is, it is a terminology
that was born from the area of biology,
but which clearly came to realize
that there are problems that
we generate as a society and that there are
solutions that we have to create
as a society.  So, the
warning, although it came from the
biological side, today we
realize that biologists, people in
the biological sciences, are
clearly insufficient and do not have
the capabilities or the knowledge to be
able to solve these
conservation problems.
So, it's already been said that part of
this solution lies in
local knowledge, in the communities, in the
territories, but it also lies in people
from areas that may be more
distant, more
distant from
conservation, as already mentioned, the
area of economics, the area of
technology, of design, of
electronics, marketing is something
that we are very far behind in the
area of science.  We as
scientists are very bad at
marketing, we are terrible and clearly
we are not the right people
to learn about marketing, but there are
people who are interested from the area
of marketing, from the area of journalism,
uh from the area of economics, as I just said
, the area of social sciences
is key because we work with people and
for people.  So, in that sense it
is super relevant to integrate these
support networks with which we
as professionals in the
sciences are, as I just said,
insufficient and we clearly do not have
those capabilities.  So, generating
these networks, I think it's something that's being
created, that's being generated a
little late, but that's where it's going, that's
where conservation should be going
.  What you say is important,
interdisciplinarity as a key and
strategic element to be able to intervene
better, I will even go a little further
with transdisciplinarity, that is,
because limiting ourselves to those
trainings and in that interaction is
inevitable in the transfer of other
knowledge.  Uh, thank you very much and
stay here with us from Pantera
and precisely from this perspective of the use
of technologies to be able to contribute
to the conservation of
wildlife.
What has been your experience in combining the technological development of the Blink A deterrent, but fundamentally what you have developed in this set of technological solutions to be able to advance in your tasks?  Yes, look, this is
actually the video that was
just being shown is from a
specific project that we are carrying out in
collaboration with SEM at the
Universidad del Desarrollo here, and it
comes to answer these
questions that I was just asking you
, that deep down
we as scientists are
often users of technology, of GPS, of
camera traps, of satellite monitoring collars
, but we have not been part of
the creation of this technology and that is
when we, to try to
address a conflict that is a
common conflict everywhere in the
world where there is a feline and there are
communities carrying out some
economic activity, mainly livestock farming in
rural areas, this conflict appears
which is that the feline preys on
the animals.  The animal can be a
cow, a horse, a sheep, or a
chicken.  And in retaliation, clearly
the farmer, seeing his
well-being and main source of
income threatened, does something.  Generally,
what that something does is
lethal control, going out to hunt the animal.  You
put this problem here in
Central Chile and it's exactly the same with
goats, for example, and the Puma.  In the
Pantanal, in the Amazon, it's with
Jaguars.  If we move to the Himalayas,
perhaps they are
smaller, more local communities, but they have the same
conflict with the Snow Leopard.  At
its core, the conflict is the same;
only the context changes.
So, in that sense, what we were
looking for was, well, to create this
device called Blinca.  I
'll explain why it's called
Armored, but what this device came to do
is gather
local knowledge.  Well, the ranchers already knew a
little bit about how to scare this away.  I'm
actually going to turn this on so you can see how it
works
and see if it scares him away.  This is what it
mainly has: a speaker,
sound comes out of here, it has lights and
a motion sensor.  Es algo
ser simple, es una solucin que ya los
ganaderos ya estaban probando para
ahuyentar al a los carnvoros fuera de
su de sus animales y que lo estn usando
a travs de, por ejemplo, estas luces
que uno pone fuera de las casas, que uno
se mueve y se prende este foco LED.  Uh,
some ranchers had been putting
battery-powered speakers on them.  There, for example, it's
playing, it's lighting up, it's making
sound, that is, it turns on lights and it has
sound and it also has gunshots.   All these things
that this deterrent has are
solutions that already came from the
territory, from the local level.
We didn't come here to reinvent the
wheel, it's something that already existed, but
what we needed was to be able to
integrate this local knowledge, what
they already knew was working
to keep carnivores
away from livestock.  And what
we did was get together, well, there's
Javi, there's Marco and the people from the SEM
here at UDD, it was, okay, how do
we make this a tool
for them, so that it can really be
useful to them, so that it's not something that
's difficult to use?  Something that costs, I don't
know, $500, that is unaffordable, but
something totally accessible and that the
solution is applicable locally.
And lastly, I also want to say that
this is also super key, it's key to show
how we reach
these communities.  I work in a
region called the Magallanes region.
For people who don't know the
Magallanes region, it's an extremely
regionalist region.  It has its own anthem, it
has its own flag.  I arrived from
Santiago, where my purpose was clearly not to
offer any solutions
to anything.  Well, clearly it wasn't from
the scientist's perspective to try
to solve the problem, but rather the
way was to approach it with humility,
first by listening.  So, first
we listened to what the problem was,
what solutions
they were having at the
time, and what their approach was.  The
approach was this, it transformed into
this, but it was their knowledge.
So, it was a solution that
was already validated for them.  So, in order to be able to launch this product, since it is already designed, already created, already ready to be installed on the ground, we needed it to be validated.
So, this is already somewhat pre-validated because it is their knowledge put here and now it will come back to the territory, which is also super important, the return in reciprocity.  I worked for a long time in
the north, in the highlands, where there
is this term which is aini, which
is basically reciprocity.
So, you receive something, you receive the
knowledge, the local knowledge,
but you also have to bring something
back.  So, what
we did was create these bridges, in
this case with technology, with
design, and now it's time for the second part,
the second leg, which is going to be,
uh, to come back and leave this element so that
hopefully it will help them in their
territory.
Yes of course.  And how important are
elements like accessibility, so that
when the solution comes back it
has the possibility of being
implemented based on the
relevance of the knowledge that is
there, but also based on
access, and thus contribute to the overall
campaign, right?  How important.  Hey, and in
that sense, Felipe, when you,
well, have been working for more than 10 years
at the mouth of the Maipo River,
well, in that exercise of transforming
a space that has long been
used as a dump,
right?, for branches, rubble and other
materials into the Maipo River wetland park
,
what have been, let's say, the or how have
these
nature-based and technology-based solutions been incorporated
for this restoration?
Yes. Well, the
Maipo River sanctuary, at its
mouth, is one of our
priority sites for action for the
foundation.  It's been there from the beginning,
since 2014. We have a
collaboration with the municipality of
Santo Domingo, but the story goes back
a little further.  Uh, the municipality of
Santo Domingo was quite a pioneer and in
2002 created an area, a
natural protection park.  Today we know of
the RENAMU that have somehow been
collecting that practice, but
they recognized this area as a
protected zone.
The Maipo River estuary, despite
being small in its
extent, is an area of enormous
richness, with a large number of
ecosystems that make its
biodiversity tremendously rich,
especially that which has to do with
birdlife.  It is a place where
more than 190 species of birds have been detected,
which represents almost a large part
of the national biodiversity,
including migratory birds.  So, it's
an important area to protect,
and therefore, first, I want to
highlight the role the municipality played
in safeguarding that place, and then, with
the arrival of the foundation,
various conservation actions have been carried out
.  I would highlight, first of all,
the formation of a
corps of park rangers as an
important first conservation action for
a completely open place.  We are in a
place where two of its boundaries make it
impossible to close.  One is the
river mouth, the entire
estuary beach, and the other is the entire
coastline between Santo Domingo and San
Antonio.  So, there are two limits that
are always very vulnerable, and that
has also brought us multiple
challenges.
And so, firstly, this body of park rangers gives it presence, gives it protection, and complements the conservation, reception, and environmental education actions.  So it is of
great importance to us
.  Then comes the action that
we take in this and other
territories that has to do with the
planning and design of
infrastructure.  Today we have
an administration there
with public restrooms.  This is a
public access park with much of its
infrastructure being
universally accessible.  It's free.  And so
today we have, in addition to this
administration, a multipurpose room, a
network of viewpointsmore than five
viewpoints, which we can tell you a
little more about latera network of
paths and walkways, almost 3 km of
paths and walkways, plazas,
restoration programs,
all these improvements, which are also
complemented by a
first-class museography, have been increasing
public visits, more or less
as an example, and in
terms of sustainable tourism.  Uh,
in 2023 we recorded 15,000
visits per year.  Uh, today in July we
have surpassed 30,000 and we hope to
end the year with 50,000.  So it's
a tremendous contribution, what's being
done.  It is a park that is very close to the metropolitan region, so it not only has influence for the Valparaso region, the province of San Antonio, but also a regional scale very much in accordance with the impact of being the mouth of the most important river in the metropolitan region.
Uh, and then actions in technology
have mainly gone to support
conservation issues.  Today we
have a technology-supported species monitoring system
.  We have identified
bird species to protect,
mainly the oystercatcher, which was
having
very low reproduction rates and through a series of
actions, mainly
exclusion fences to ensure its
nesting, the oystercatchers make their
nests in the sand of the beach, it is a
very simple nest, so they are very
vulnerable to predators such as
free-roaming dogs or foxes.  So, in that
sense, being able to generate
monitoring actions has increased their
reproduction rate.  We also
monitor the rufous-collared sparrow, which is an
endangered bird and
is also very difficult to identify.
So, through
awareness-raising and monitoring actions, we have
also been able to generate a
community awareness.  Uh, we have
camera traps for
vertebrates that we then systematize
through the Wild Insites software.
We have a Motus antenna in
collaboration with the ROC.  Uh, these are
the Motus antennas, uh, it's an
international monitoring community
mainly for birds, not
exclusively, but mainly for
birds.  And that allows us to monitor the
ringed species that travel from the
Strait of Magellan to Alaska on a
flight they make year after year.
So, an
international community for the
protection of birds is also being generated, and there are
organizations in Chile like ROC,
but in the United States like Odovon, that
are creating this
international alliance for the preservation of the
migratory route.  It's super important.
Uh, we have generated an ecological restoration program, as you were saying, uh, a large part of the park's land had been degraded by dumping branches and debris after the earthquakes, through a restoration program uh promoted by us and with the support of the regional government.
Um, we are recovering today almost half or more than half of those hectares that had been degraded with native flora, with the support of the communities, restoring with local associations the dune scrubland, the coastal sclerophyllous forest, marsh vegetation also in different associations such as nuclei, intropic lines, millaqui forests, in a way generating an innovation laboratory for the socio-environmental restoration of this place, which is not only applicable in this park, but can also radiate to other parks in the province and the region.  So there are
several actions beyond
landscape architecture that are being
applied in the
Maipo River wetland.
Yes. Well, it's a tremendous challenge, and
a large area, but it's a
tremendous challenge.  Hey, and now looking at Matas's experience, thinking a bit about situations that might be very different, how have they been implemented or which ones do you have most readily available in your memory?
What are those innovative strategies
that have been implemented
to overcome the lack of space and
funding, and specifically within the
context of expanding
urban green projects?
Dale, thank you very much.  Today, a little earlier,
to comment on what they've said,
which is great, huh, the thing about money is
super important.  Felipe mentioned Black
Rock, as if to get Black Rock excited,
I'd prefer we change it.  There's
ethical banking, a double-impact approach that
questions where our money is,
what it's being used for, because
BlackRock doesn't own that money, it's
us, the pension funds, it
's our money.  Y en qu se est
utilizando?  in armaments, in the
oil industry, in I don't know, in
anything you can think of that you do
n't want that money to be in,
if you ask where the money is, you won't
answer, but it's
probably there.  And there are other places where
money is being used for
environmental, cultural, and educational purposes.
So we are responsible and money is super
important for
positive things to happen,
even through consumption.  Consumers choose who to buy from, right?
Buy trees at Cultiva, Vivero
Cultiva, right?  Buy native plants from nurseries
everywhere, okay?  And what they
've done at the MAP is spectacular.
The number of birds is incredible; those who
can go, go, walk around, it's
wonderful.  And I'd like to mention that
we planted last year, we've been at
2000 m for 2 years in the
Cruz de Piedra sanctuary, 93,000 hectares of
protected areas now in the upper
Maipo basin.  Uh, we planted 12,000
native trees in a core area with
infiltration trenches.  So, I think it's
spectacular to hear what
Felipe was telling us and to know that at the same time we
are beginning to protect the entire
basin, that there is still much to be done, but
in this river is the life of the
city of Santiago, the Mapocho too and
everything, but the Maipo is the great backbone
that brings life to this city and
allows us that transformation into a dream, a
great garden,
right?  Okay, great.  And about what you were
asking me, the other day I was
walking with an architect friend in
Europe and he was saying to me, "Hey, how lucky we are here
in Santiago with the amount of space they have
to transform."  So
sometimes we don't think we have that much, but
they are impressed by everything that
can be done.  Well, it might be missing, but there are multiple opportunities.
There is a lack of resources.  Yes, we are now working on
the Millahuaqui Forest project,
implementing it with funds from the
regional government, through a bidding process,
and with
impressive community involvement.  The same
process: we identify the place together with
the municipality and the neighbors, we make
the design with them, we plant with them,
and we are sure that they will
protect and take care of it forever.
And the day the municipality doesn't
maintain it, they're going to
protest because they appropriated that
forest.  And in the city of Santiago,
I believe there are multiple opportunities.   We
need to challenge how we spend
public and private money, like
the others I mentioned earlier, because a
lot of money goes towards
concrete solutions, towards strength, and the best technology
today is nature.  If
we have a small granule that we don't know if it's
alive or dead, we give it moisture and soil
and it starts to grow, it transforms into
something that gives us shade, attracts
insects, generates no waste,
nothing that cannot be reused, captures
carbon, cleans water,
the best technology and the human being
is most capable of reproducing it and improving it
like the millaque or the arboreal, many
techniques mixed.
Well, then I think that's the
answer, and yes, we need
a stronger commitment from both the public and private sectors
.  And when they commit, it
works superbly.  Cosmo is an example
.  Cerro Renca, which has cost us a
lot, we've been working on it for 15 years, comes with a
very strong public-private transformation, which demonstrates
that with good alliances and
good management, transformations can be made
.
Yes. There, there's a really
interesting case because you have two
competing companies, Coca-Cola Andina and CCU,
joining forces to supply
recycled water to that area that they're trying to
reforest.  So, it can be done
, it can be done, and we have to make it even
more possible.  Okay, fine, but let's change
to this topic that has generated
a lot of interest, which is what you
've shared with us, Felipe, regarding the fact
that philanthropy clearly doesn't
solve our challenges,
and of course, the challenge lies in how to
generate economic systems that
reconcile these of generating
income and conserving.  You have
also spoken of the Earth as a
conservation asset.  So, from there,
what do you think are the
key elements to have
a model, or that should have an
economic model based on
natural capital to be profitable and at the same
time provide space for conservation?
Well, uh, look, I'd like to take
several things we've talked about
to answer the question, I mean, the
topic of communication, for example,
which I know Eduardo is raising.  Uh, that
seems to me,
or the experience of
moving from Santiago to another place.
Well, I believe that human beings
have the possibility of contributing and
receiving that super important exchange,
and the ancestral has a lot of
information that is very powerful, but so does the
new.  Already.  In other words, nowadays, in
ancient times, there are no
ancient satellites, and today, with the
technology we have to see from
space, we can do a lot of
things.  I believe that this communication, this dialogue, is reciprocal.
That's why I gave the example of the Matsillenca, I could have said Puerto Gala or Medimoyu, uh, of communities uh connected to each other, connected to the world, uh, because that's the new world we have, that is, we can all know what's happening in real time, in places.  So,
the first stage of inserting
nature into the market
occurs through generating this new
exchange dollar that we called
carbon bonds, right?
In other words, the climate crisis is discussed at the end of the last century, and a form of transaction is established, which is carbon, and rules are put in place.  Uh, that's the
first big deal.  So, the
dollar at this moment, because
biodiversity,
biodiversity bonds are not mandatory, they are
voluntary.  The dollar, the
currency in which trade is done today, all of
that is carbon.  So, it's absolutely necessary
to start talking about
natural capital, ecosystem services,
monetization, and generating income. I mean, I
hear Felipe speak and I get excited,
but of course, there are foundations, there are
people behind it putting in money, and I wish
we had
enough philanthropists so we wouldn't have to be
talking here about pure science and pure
wonders, but the truth is that's not the case
.  So, my personal thing is to
make conservation profitable.
Unlike the rest of
Latin America, in Latin America it is very
common to hear that a community
owns a large expanse of land.
In Chile that's not quite the case.  The
communities do not own the land.
In other words, the largest properties here are
ranches in Puerto Natales, Santauco,
HiloLilo, Puchelln; they belong to people and
families who are
economically very powerful.
Below that you don't have extensive land, you don't have, when we talk about projects of 10,000 hectares, there are few plots of land in Chile that have those characteristics.  Uh, it's not a
national park, is it?  We're
talking about private matters.  So, the only way to incorporate those private properties into a system that allows for this coherence, which all of us here know works, is to generate transaction models. That's why, with Carbon Real, I started from the real estate world because I'm a lawyer, I was a prosecutor for a real estate company for 10 years, I was a lawyer for Banco Santander, and I come from the world of Wall Street.
And it shocked me to see that everything they were
doing was concrete, and that
when we proposed that the theme
be more ecological, greener, more
nature, there were no
economic indicators to be able to do it.  So, that's why I
started this business thing.   They
tell me the business of them is not selling
land with
conservation formats using
legal tools that are also important,
such as the real right of conservation,
which in Chile is super pioneering,
super, I think the impact it
could have, because it
absolutely does not, a
legal tool that allows protecting
ecosystem services, the
conservation of nature with
a clause that we lacked because we
copied the gringos, the real right
of conservation which is atomic, but it does not
have a tax benefit.
So today you have the possibility
of trading ecosystem services,
protecting them, handing them over to a foundation in
exchange for nothing.   We'll do
the job for you.  If we issue
carbon credits, we issue biodiversity credits, we do the
state's job, but
we pay, we have to pay taxes, you know
?  In
developed countries, no taxes are paid on
ecosystem service transactions that have an impact on
all people.  So, I think we
have that dialogue, that
dialogue that is brutal.  I like to
say it bluntly because people always look at me like I'm a
disgusting lawyer.
So, I like it that way.  I like it
because we have to face
reality, stop romanticizing things.  It's
true, my
connection with Patagonia changed my life. I
mean, I had an accident in Torres del
Paine and they rescued me, and that's why
my life changed and I realized that I was just
worrying about
concrete, that's why the
word came to me.  So, by
implementing that technology, by
connecting with people, I've learned a
lot and I feel that they've also
learned from what we know, and they've been able to
improve their quality of life.
Today we at Carbon Real, with
a scientific team that we ended up
incorporating NASA, the University
of Chile, Maryland, and the Japanese from
Entity Data, have a
carbon credit certification company. We just
approved the first
methodology worldwide to
create carbon credits based on
real-time net ecosystem exchange measurement.
We have sensors, one sensor in the Aicn region that is installed 46 m high above the treetops, which measures how the ecosystem breathes in real time.  And
we have blockchain and we have all the
technology that is necessary, which in the
end is like using Word, right?  This is not
the important thing.  The important thing
is not to complicate things.  I often hear
when people talk about technology that we need to
add layers of difficulty,
like "let's add blockchain," or "let's add
pong." No, let's use the tools that
are necessary, right?  I do
n't need to use Excel if I'm going to send a letter
, right?  I'm going to create
a database, I use Word, I use
simple things.  So everything we have
done at ISEN is based on
generating models that allow us to
monitor trust.  Today,
all these ecosystem
service transaction models have a serious problem
.  The first
stage of carbon credits was
severely damaged due to the
amount of deception and fraud that
existed.  So, today there is a
new cycle in which technology is the
great support for confidence in
those projects, in the results, in
the measurements.  That technology is
incredibly expensive.  We have
spent millions of dollars.  That's why, that's why
when I'm introduced they call me a
philanthropist, because I put up the money myself
.  No, we haven't been able to raise money
because, when we
ask Blackrock or the Investment Fund
how much has been sold, what the
result is.  Entonces eh la la el el
modelo que hicimos fue mejorar la la el
monitoreo, hacerlo barato.  Sure, the
equipment is very expensive, we work with
satellites that are tremendously expensive,
but today we are measuring
ecosystem respiration, right?  This
net exchange, uh, in real time, on
1,500,000 hectares, of which
629,000 hectares are private.  We did a pilot project with 10,000
hectares that will be extended
to 100,000 hectares by the end of the year.
We plan to start next year and generate a formula that will allow landowners to receive at least $80 per hectare per year.  Let's talk about money; it
would also be interesting to hear
Felipe say how much they spend making
all those nice things.  Uh, the
communities, the additionality,
improving a forest in Patagonia
should give between 15 and 30 dollars per hectare
per year in projects that ensure that
those 15 dollars stay in the community, because
we need to protect, have
park rangers, thin out, bring closer,
monitor, all that when you talk about
thousands of hectares you're talking about millions of
dollars.  And in Chile, what we have in abundance
are pristine ecosystems that are not
generating economic value, right?
Monetizable.
So, the story of Carbon
Real and the technology has to do
with that, incorporating
the modern and the ancestral into this ecosystem, so that they
communicate, so that in
that communication we also put a
little bit of a challenge on
the community, let's
challenge it.  Portugala is a two-
lot area that dumps garbage into the sea.  Uh,
so the communities are super
good because they also have a
serious problem, I mean, part of the
problems are also the communities.   So
I think that's super
important.  We talk about governance and it
seems that the community surpasses everything we
have to do.  He doesn't know.  They are
unaware.  I gave a class in
Matsillenca about how the forest breathes.
The Machillenca community doesn't know what it breathes, what it cleans.  Oh, why
are these carbon credits? Don't they
clean the air through
trees? They couldn't believe it.  There was even a
guy who was there while I was talking,
cutting down a tree with a machete.
I told him, "Please stop. What
you're
saying isn't relevant."  And they are
used to doing those things due to a
lack of information.  So, I think that
to finally round out
our proposal, it has to do with that, that
is, let's move forward, let's bring the best
of the ancestral, the best of the
communities, the best of technology,
let's make it as unobtrusive as possible, let's
not overload, we don't need to put
a tower every 10,000 hectares, as the
Japanese said, we convinced them that we
could do it with every 1 million
hectares.  Hey, it's cheaper.   Let
's monetize, let's talk about money without
fear.  We were taught that it was ugly.
Lie.  It's the only way to achieve
our goal.
Thank you very much, Felipe.  Let's talk about
money.  Very good.  It seems to me, it makes a
lot of sense because, ultimately,
how we generate these languages in
economic development also has to
have a correlation in how this
becomes an alternative to what we are
doing today.  And the language of
money is one that is
tremendously and deeply ingrained in our daily lives.  Hey Eduardo, and from this same perspective, or from the differences you have from yours, in a regenerative bioeconomy rooted in and based on biodiversity, what elements define it most strongly?
Well, I think we've actually talked about it
these past two days and yesterday in the dialogues,
thinking precisely about
these solutions, and I think there's something
fundamental, and that's
life support systems, right?  If there is no
clarity on what the
regenerative cycle of the earth, water,
air and energy is, and now with more
intensity due to the introduction of these
new technologies such as
artificial intelligence which will be
intensive in energy consumption.  If we do
n't understand these cycles, both in
rural and urban areas, and
particularly in Chile,
I saw the figures at the Biofin stand yesterday,
right?  40% of municipalities in
Chile are at risk of experiencing
water scarcity.  62% of the land
in Chile is eroded and degraded.
Uh, but there are also a number of
biosphere reserves in Chile where
nothing is happening
.  So, it's a very
strong contrast.
And the other one, and the other one, the one from the air that I mentioned to you earlier.  Of course, I've
been here these past few days and I've been observing the
air in Chile.  In fact, let me tell you, I
blew my nose and it bled
.
That's what I said, what we're experiencing is tough, and it's our daily life.  So, if we don't understand the cycle of something as
fundamental as those elements that
support the city and all the
other organisms that depend on
those vital resources for life,
and we don't design
new solutions by placing
water, for example, such a
vital element, at the center...  In fact, in Colombia there have been
attempts to organize the territory
around water.  So, how do
we design these new economies?
Understanding that life in the center
stems from that concept, how do
we deconstruct that concept of life
in the center?  Of course, life in the
center is in the water, where is it?
What is the state of the watersheds?
I imagine that the Maip River, Maip, uh, well, it must have a number of challenges because the river is a conductor and a connector of the territory.  In other words, I
shouldn't differentiate between Valparaso,
Via, and, I mean, how to separate or
understand the territory by
municipalities, but rather where
the water is crossing, right?  and what is the
state of those basins.
So, I think part of understanding these bioeconomies from a regenerative approach is understanding how this life support system is happening and how nature-based solutions, supported by the use of technologies and financed with these new forms that Felipe was telling us about, are going to tackle these fundamental problems.  And I believe that, from what I
've discussed with several people,
Chile could even be an
ideal laboratory for understanding how to
put water at the center in the
design processes of nature-based solutions
.  There is a challenge there that I
believe Chile can be a pioneer in
this type of proposal,
and I think I'm also going to
bring in an element to close, and that
element is the ancestral element,
right?  Our ancestral communities
have taught us that life is sacred, that
water is sacred, and that
the land we depend on to
feed ourselves every day, to go and have lunch right now,
is sacred.
So, if we don't understand that our life, and the life of beings, and of all beings, and of humanity and what is more than human, is sacred, right?  And we bring that
view of the sacred to the
creation of this new world that we are
creating, because I feel that we are
redesigning the world and that implies
stepping out of our comfort zone, both for those
who are in the territory and for
us who are in the cities.
If we don't step outside of that and approach this redesign process from a completely different perspective, stepping outside our comfort zone, if we don't do it that way, we're going to repeat the same unconscious patterns of behavior that are causing us to design solutions from the wrong place, right?  And one of those places is
us in the center.  Error, error.
We cannot be in the center.
We're part of it, but nature is the center
, right?  And what she
provides for us to exist, for
humanity and what is more than human.   Of course
, just sit down, look at
nature, take notes, and you know what I mean.
Hey, and well, we're getting to the
last questions because, believe it or not
, time has flown by, and
Nicols, in this sense, you, well,
we talked about the, what's it called?,
the collaboration,
how important it is to collaborate
from the perspective of the
different disciplines, from the
different areas of knowledge.  Tell us a little bit about it,
and also tell us how you see the future
from there, how you have been able to integrate
these collaborative groups,
what the scope has been so far,
and how you see the future
working in this way as you have
done to this day
in all this effort to protect
wildlife and, of course,
coexistence with it.
Well, the work we do,
unlike perhaps some NGOs such as
the Cosmo Foundation,
they have a territory where they
work.  As an NGO, we do not
work in a territory, and the way
we have to get to
work in a territory is through
collaboration.
In other words, collaboration is a fundamental part of our work, no matter what.  We need to
talk to the rancher in the case
of Patagonia, or to the landowner in the
case of the National Park, or to CONAF (National Forestry Corporation).
We can't do our
work without collaboration. The
beginning, the present,
and the future of our work will definitely
be based on
collaboration.  Y y lo otro tambin que es
importante es el lo que se ha hablado
bastante que es el el tema de los
saberes, de cmo integrar estos saberes
en el caso nuestro en la conservacin
porque muchas veces uno escucha, no s,
palabras como tecnologa, soluciones
pasar la naturaleza y uno piensa, no s,
tecnologa, eh, inteligencia artificial,
eh cosas que son ms como electrnicas,
no s, uno se imagina como modernidad,
eh, soluciones basado en la naturaleza.
Sometimes you think, I don't know, about helicopters that were created from nature or water-repellent materials, as always, based on innovation, technological innovation, but many times technology and nature-based solutions are in nature, they are in communities, I mean, a key technology for human evolution was arrowheads, for example, that's a technology.  Clearly a
technology and does not include batteries,
chips, electronics, or anything like that.  And an
example was also seen in the panel just now
where the community member from Cancosa was speaking
, where a
nature-based solution from
local knowledge was and is the management
of wetlands, which I have been
working for years in the highlands and that has been
one of the main
solutions to the issue beyond
livestock management of the
wetlands of the issue of climate change,
that is, it is a solution that requires
more than, as
the community member said here, a shovel and
a pickaxe and the knowledge
of the communities.  In the case of
Patagonia, where
we are working today, we are
also seeing a
problem with the conservation of
grasslands due to
overgrazing, which is only now being
noticed and evidenced because
two things converged.  100 years of grazing, 120 years of overgrazing, of putting more animals on the land than the Earth could handle, converged with climate change.
So, what we are
seeing today is that economic activity is
being threatened, but
conservation and biodiversity are also
being threatened.  So, there is less
grass, less grass for
livestock, less grass for
guanacos, and consequently, fewer
guanacos for pumas.  So, it's a cascade of problems that has been progressing, and today the solution that many farmers are seeing is also based on nature, which is regenerative grazing. What regenerative grazing does is observe how herds of wild animals graze, and then it moves.
That prevents overgrazing.
So, what I'm getting at is that
collaboration is largely about this:
observing, seeing, and listening to
people's solutions. It's not about
technology as seen from Santiago, in
our case, as if from the outside,
from China, from the United States.
The technology is there, it's
there, and I believe that many of the
solutions will come from
local collaboration. I think that will
also be a key part of our
work in the region and in the other
places where we work; it's that
kind of collaboration, the
collaboration of local knowledge.   Of course
.  Thank you so much.  And Felipe,
we left the design issue a little bit pending
, didn't we?
And that's where I'd like us to address it, and also to wrap up the question round, uh, what can you say about how the architecture has been incorporated into this design of the Ro Maipo Wetland Park and how it's also designed to blend in and be part of a harmonious communication with nature?  Tell us
a little more and tell us where
the immediate future perspective
of what you are doing in
that regard is headed.
Yes, thank you for the question.  Before
answering her, and very briefly, I would like to
address Felipe's
question about resources, which is, of course,
super important.  I believe that
today, and we have seen it at the
foundation, there are public,
private, national, and international funds
available for
conservation actions.  At the foundation,
the philanthropy we do is to contribute the
work of the foundation's team,
which is a transdisciplinary team of
biologists, architects, designers,
engineers, sociologists, etc.,
to apply it to the projects.  But
all the funds for
restoration actions,
infrastructure implementation, etc., come from
grant applications, and in that sense,
all the management that is done
to make the applications,
follow-up, then all the accountability
of funds, etc., is a tremendous amount of work
.  Uh, it's been done since the foundation,
but I want to say that those
resources exist, you just have to go out and
find them, it's a big challenge, and yes, they
are available.  That's what I wanted to
start with.  From the
design perspective, that's super
important.
The subject of architecture has always
been a bit of an
egocentric art; in some sense,
constructing a building
is an exercise in creating a
habitable sculptural work.  And on many
occasions we have seen
throughout history that the context, the
territory, remains somewhat detached from
this work.  We, since our
foundation, have a completely
different perspective.
We want, in a way, for the protagonist to be nature, the ecosystem, and for the architecture and infrastructure to be at the service of that land, to somehow give access to the communities, because we understand that in that access and in that experience there is an important conservation action, but that it is put at the service of that territory.  And one of the
tools we have used to
design these projects has been the
concept of biomimicry, which
has to do with how to generate
smart and sustainable solutions to
human challenges with
strategies that have been used
by nature.  There, for example,
honeycomb-like structures, uh, or
helicopters, as Nicols was saying, of
course they are, uh, uh, applications
of uh observations of nature.  And
in that sense, it begins with a
very humble exercise, getting to know
nature, getting to know the territory
where the intervention will take place, understanding its
ideography, its topography, its rhythms,
the climates, etc., the
ancestral knowledge, of course, the
technologies, the materials,
and then being able to apply them in a
design that doesn't necessarily come only
from the foundation team, but
also incorporates the community.  And
there's an example, uh, that's in
the video that was playing during
the presentation, is the Seven
Colors Lookout, which is one of the
emblematic works for us at the
foundation. It involves a
challenge to build a high-altitude tower, a lookout tower, in the Maipo River wetland
, which is a fairly flat area,
to be able to observe the entire ecosystem.
The terrain, as you can imagine, is
very wet and swampy.  Well,
soil mechanics suggested ideally to have as
few foundations as possible, to have the fewest possible
foundations.
And we were in the midst of that challenge when
we observed that one of the
characteristic birds of the
wetlands, because it's not just from the
Maipo River, which is the Seven Colors, which
became very famous with the
Pan American Games, was
weaving its nest on a stick, on a
reed of the cattail marsh, right?  Hey, it was just
one stick.  So we
said, why not use this same
strategy of generating a single
structural base?
And from there, to generate this lookout tower, and the conical shape of this lookout, which is also the conical shape of the nests of the seven colors, also responds to a theme of use, generating in the access the smallest number of species so that the foundation is as small as possible and so that in some way the route can be generated and that shape grows to the top, which is where we needed the most space so that visitors could have this contemplation of the entire territory.  So, there is
an infrastructure that has a
functional use, being a lookout tower,
but that in turn highlights a
heritage of the ecosystem and is an
infrastructure that, in its
form, is also educating the communities.
Together with or associated with that
infrastructure, we have signage
that alludes to or refers to
the architects of Pajonal.  Who
are the architects of Pajonal?  The
schoolboy, the seven-colored one, the
worker.  Already?  So, how can we also
highlight the architecture and
techniques of these inhabitants of the
territory?
Great contribution from our colleagues, isn't it?
Definitely.  Hey, isn't that
ability to, well, look, really important?  Sometimes
looking is the great starting point for
everything we need to do, and of
course, listening.  Hey, I know
we have to wrap this up, and well, I want to
thank each and every one of you for your
different perspectives.
I know that there were still questions left unanswered, and we need to learn to talk about money when we talk about conservation, to stop romanticizing these missions that have a tremendous epic quality, that constitute a moral imperative, but that doesn't mean they don't need a foothold in the languages that coexist in our reality.  And
from there, of course, remember that
in order to move forward in these
transformational processes, we need to
change in the
different ways.  On one hand, there are the
regulatory aspects that need to
continue transforming in order to
properly accompany and support
these transformation processes.  On the
other hand, it is key that technology continues to
advance, and you have, have had,
and continue to have a very
important role in this. And of course, the
institutional framework that supports these
processes and facilitates the
implementation of these types of
solutions can also accompany you
on this simultaneous path where we have to
walk and chew gum because we do
n't have much time, and where the urgency
is in each of our minds.
So, I want to thank each of you
for sharing your experience, your
perspectives, the different roles and
jobs you do, which are tremendously
valuable, where these
common elements are recognized, such as working in
community, listening, seeing, being able to
dialogue, to encode different
languages, sharing
different knowledge, and from there being able to
allow
all this that we seek to transform to take root in the community.  So
, thank you all so much
for this space and for sharing what you
know.